
## 1. Installation & Verification

- Download Git from the official website: https://git-scm.com

- To verify installation:
```bash

git

```

- You should see a list of Git commands if the installation was successful.

## 2. Working with Repositories

- Clone a repository:
```bash

git clone <repository_url>

```

- Initialize a Git repository:
```bash

git init

```

This initailazes the folder to a git version control and any changes made in this are then recorded by the .git hidden folder .
This creates a hidden `.git` folder that starts tracking the directory.

- View hidden folders:
```bash

ls -a

```

## 3. Tracking Changes

- Check the status of files:
```bash

git status

```
- The untracked files are the files who are not been added to the staging area 
- Untracked files (not in staging area) are shown in red.
- Tracked files (in staging area) are shown in green.

  
- Add specific file to staging area:
```bash

git add <filename>

```

- Add all files to staging area:
```bash

git add .

```

- Remove file from staging area:
```bash

git restore --staged <filename>

```

## 4. Committing Changes

- Commit the staged changes:
```bash

git commit -m "your commit message"

```

This means that all the changes will be now saved in the history of the repository .
`-m` flag is used to add a message to the commit.


- View commit history:
```bash

git log

```

- Each commit is identified by a unique hash ID.

## 5. Resetting Commits

- Reset to a previous commit:
```bash

git reset <commit_hash>

```

- hash id is the big 20 digit alpha numeric thing that is written in front of the commit when we prompt git log .
- This removes commits made after that hash and moves the changes to the staging area.

- After resetting a pushed commit, force push is required as the commit is being shown on the git hub but not on my local system  .
- We cannot do this normally so we force push it .
```bash

git push origin <branch> -f

```

## 6. Stashing Changes

- Save changes temporarily in the backstage area .
- If i have made changes to a file and it is currently tracked  and now i want to work with a clean slate but i have this file in which i have made changes to then to work with a clean slate we use the command :
```bash

git stash

```


- To bring the files from the backstage area to the staging area we use the command :
```bash

git stash pop

```

- Clear all stashed changes or to clear the backstage area we use the command :
```bash

git stash clear

```

## 7. Connecting to Remote Repository

- To connect your local repository on your device to a remote github repository we use the command :
```bash

git remote add origin <github_repo_url>

```
Here ,
remote - means connecting to a remote thing like a github repo 
add - means adding 
origin - it is the name of your own account (sometimes we use upstream in case of origin when we fork someones other repository )


- Verify the remote:
```bash

git remote -v

```

- The output will show the fetch and push URLs. 

## 8. Push and Pull

- Push commits to GitHub:
```bash

git push origin main

```
main is the name of the brach we are pushing our commit to .


- To keep your repository  up to date with the changes made in the upstream branch we use the command :
```bash

git pull upstream <branch>

```

- This runs 2 commands :
```bash

git fetch upstream <branch>
```
This gets the latest changes from the main brach of the upstream repository .

``` bash
git merge upstream/<branch>

```
This merges those fetched changes to the < branch > of your repository .

## 9. Branching in Git

- In git hub we have various branches and the default branch is called as the main / master branch . 
- Whenever we are making any changes in a big code base we should always create a separate branch on which we commit our changes . 
- This is done because if there are any errors in the commit made then the main brach is not affected .
- To create a brach we use the command :
```bash

git branch <new_branch_name>

```

- Switch to another branch:
```bash

git checkout <branch_name>

```

  - HEAD points to the current branch for new commits.

## 10. Working with Forks and Upstream

- When you have forked someone others git hub repository and have it cloned and you want to add from where it is forked it is called as the upstream url . 
- So similar to adding / connecting your local repository to the remote repository you can do this by using the command :
```bash

git remote add upstream <original_repo_url>

```

- Pull updates from upstream:
```bash

git pull upstream <branch>

```

## 11. Pull Requests

- Fork a repository and create a new branch for your changes.

- Push changes to GitHub.

- GitHub prompts to create a Pull Request (PR) for the branch.

- If more commits are pushed to the same branch, they are added to the open PR.

- Only one PR per branch can be open at a time.

- For new features, create a separate branch and PR.

  

## 12. Squashing Commits

- To merge selected commits in a single commit we use the command :
```bash

git rebase -i <commit_hash_above_target>
```
- In the interactive list:
- Use `pick` to keep the commit.
- Use `squash` to merge the commit with the pick one above.
- Exit interactive mode using `:x`.
- Edit and save the final commit message.

  
